Style guide - code blocks (#156)
mongodb/docs-meta: source/style-guide/markup/directives/code-blocks.txt

Code Examples
=============

> Snooty supports three directives for including code samples in a docs page:

Reviewer: Agreed! A TOC in the right nave pane would be very helpful.

- ``code-block``
- ``io-code-block``
- ``literalinclude``

> These directives feature a monospace font and syntax highlighting that makes the
> source code contained in them easier to interpret.

Reviewer 2: [Suggestion for minimalism]

```suggestion
These directives feature a monospace font and syntax highlighting that makes
source code easier to interpret.
```

> Code Blocks

Author: How do you envision this being formatted? With a similar tabbed interface?

> Code Blocks

Reviewer 3: No changes needed at this time. I was thinking that an example rendered code block could be shown at the top of each section, perhaps in an Example admonition (used by Icon Roles and Image Lightboxes sections). I think this isn't urgent and could be completed in a separate ticket at a future time.

-----------

The ``code-block`` directive formats a code sample written beneath the
directive.

Syntax
~~~~~~

.. code-block::

   .. code-block:: <language>
      :copyable: <boolean>
      :emphasize-lines: <line numbers>
      :linenos:
      :caption: <caption text>
      :source: <url>

      <code sample>

Options
~~~~~~~

.. list-table::

   * - ``<language>``
     - The language to use for syntax highlighting. 
       
       For a complete list of supported languages, see the
       `leafygreen-ui GitHub repository. <https://github.com/mongodb/leafygreen-ui/tree/main/packages/code#properties>`__

       **Default:** None
 
   * - ``:copyable: <boolean>``

>      -  Whether to show the Copy button for the code sample.

Reviewer 3: I think it's because it's a div, which lacks an alt text tag. However, I reached out to Design Systems to ask whether they could add text when you hover over it which could be better than nothing.

>      -  Whether to show the Copy button for the code sample.

Reviewer 3: Following up for @corryroot 
Here's the solution the design systems team decided upon: https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/LG-3874

>      -  Whether to show the Copy button for the code sample.

Reviewer 4: @ccho-mongodb, awesome. Thanks!

        **Default:** ``true``

   * - ``:emphasize-lines: <line number>``
     - Lines to highlight for the code sample. You can specify a range 
       of line numbers, individual line numbers, or both.

       **Default:** None

   * - ``:linenos``
     - Shows line numbers for the code sample.

       **Default:** None
  
   * - ``:caption: <caption text>``
     -  The caption for the code sample.

        **Default:** None 

   * - ``:source: <url>``
     - The URL of the code file. This option adds a link to the 

>        specified URL on the right side of the code sample.

Author: Removed this text to (hopefully) align with a suggestion made by @ccho-mongodb

       
       You must also specify ``:copyable: true`` (or omit the ``:copyable:`` option)

>        for this option to work.

Author: reworded

       
       **Default:** None

> 

Author: When I was originally working on the ticket, [Cassidy confirmed the attribute is deprecated.](https://mongodb.slack.com/archives/C018UTGP23T/p1698421402661889?thread_ts=1698257615.434079&cid=C018UTGP23T)

Do you still think it should be added?

      :linenos:
      :copyable: true
      :emphasize-lines: 1, 4-5
      :caption: An example Python code block

      print("Hello Docs team!") 
      print("This is Python code...") 
      print("...inside a code-block.")
      print("The line numbers are over here <-")
      print("And the Copy button is over there ->")

The previous ``code-block`` directive creates the following output:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:
   :copyable: true
   :emphasize-lines: 1, 4-5
   :caption: An example Python code block

   print("Hello Docs team!") 
   print("This is Python code...") 
   print("...inside a code-block.")
   print("The line numbers are over here <-")
   print("And the Copy button is over there ->")

Example 2
~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block::
   
   .. code-block:: python
      :source: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-ecosystem/blob/36f9cc7260a246d47cb05ac35276a2c92734b028/conf.py#L120

      html_theme = sconf.theme.name
      html_theme_path = [os.path.join(conf.paths.buildsystem, 'themes')]
      html_title = conf.project.title
      htmlhelp_basename = 'MongoDBdoc'

The previous ``code-block`` directive creates the following output:

.. code-block:: python

>       :source: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-ecosystem/blob/36f9cc7260a246d47cb05ac35276a2c92734b028/conf.py#L120

Author: good catch

~~~~~~~

.. list-table::

   * - ``:copyable: <boolean>``
     -  Whether to show the Copy button for the input code.
   
        **Default:** ``false``
   
   * - ``:language:``
     - The language to use for syntax highlighting. You can specify
       different languages for the input and output code. 
       
       For a complete list of supported languages, see the
       `leafygreen-ui GitHub repository. <https://github.com/mongodb/leafygreen-ui/tree/main/packages/code#properties>`__

       **Default:** None

   * - ``:linenos:``
     - Shows line numbers for the code sample.

       **Default:** None

   * - ``:emphasize-lines: <line number>``
     - Lines to highlight for the code sample. You can specify a range 
       of line numbers, individual line numbers, or both.

       **Default:** None
   
   * - ``:visible: <boolean>``
     - Whether the output code is initially visible. If ``false``, the user 
       must click a button to see the output.

       **Default:** ``true``

   * - ``:caption: <caption text>``
     - The caption for the code sample.

       **Default:** None

   * - ``:source: <url>``
     - The URL of the code file. This option adds a link to the 

>        specified URL on the right side of the code sample.

Author: removed

>        You must also specify ``copyable: true`` for this option to work.

Author: reworded

      "This is Python code..."
      "...inside an io-code-block."

Example 2
~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block::
   
   .. io-code-block::
      :source: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-node/blob/0cf95d4eac536ed0ae1a2085948dd98f24ac48af/source/quick-reference.txt#L473
      :copyable: true

      .. input::
         :language: javascript
         
         coll.find({ $text: { $search: 'zissou' } });

      .. output::
         :language: javascript

         [
             { title: 'The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou', ... }
         ]

The previous ``io-code-block`` directive creates the following output:

.. io-code-block::
   :source: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-node/blob/0cf95d4eac536ed0ae1a2085948dd98f24ac48af/source/quick-reference.txt#L473
   :copyable: true

   .. input::
      :language: javascript
         
      coll.find({ $text: { $search: 'zissou' } });

   .. output::
      :language: javascript

      [
          { title: 'The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou', ... }
      ]

Literal Includes
----------------

The ``literalinclude`` directive formats a code sample pulled in from another file.
This directive is helpful if you need to keep the code in a separate file

> or if you need to display the same code sample in more than one place.

Author: I have no problem with this rewording, but the Style Guide discourages "multiple"

> or if you need to display the same code sample in more than one place.

Reviewer 4: @mongoKart, can you share a citation? I don't see "multiple" in our list of terms and see that we use it across the Style Guide.

> or if you need to display the same code sample in more than one place.

Reviewer 4: In this case, I think the [concise terms guidance](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/concise-terms/) provides an argument in favor.

> or if you need to display the same code sample in more than one place.

Author: You're right--I don't see it in the Style Guide proper either. Where I do see it is in `TooWordy.yml`, a Vale rule that came with the `mongodb-vale` repo and which I see popups for in VS Code. If these rules don't accurately reflect our style, I would love to get them changed.

Like I said, "multiple" works for me!

.. note::  include vs. literalinclude

   Use the ``include`` directive to include an ``rst`` file in the docs. Use the
   ``literalinclude`` directive to include a code file in the docs.

Syntax
~~~~~~

.. code-block::

   .. literalinclude:: <file path>
      :language: <language>
      :copyable: <boolean>
      :start-after: <line of code>
      :end-before: <line of code>
      :linenos:
      :lineno-start: <line number>
      :emphasize-lines: <line numbers>
      :caption: <caption>
      :dedent: <number>

Options
~~~~~~~

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe consider adding a sentence that says all of these options are optional.

.. list-table::

   * - ``<file path>``

>      - **Required.** The path to the file in the repository that contains the code you
>        want to show.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - **Required.** Path to the file in the repository that contains the code to show.
```

       **Default:** None

   * - ``:language: <language>``

>      - The language to use for syntax highlighting. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Language to use for syntax highlighting. 
```

       
       For a complete list of supported languages, see the
       `leafygreen-ui GitHub repository. <https://github.com/mongodb/leafygreen-ui/tree/main/packages/code#properties>`__

       **Default:** None
 
   * - ``:copyable: <boolean>``

>      - Whether to show the Copy button for the code sample.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Option that indicates whether to show the :guilabel:`Copy` button.
```

       **Default:** ``true``

   * - ``:start-after: <line of code>``

>      - The line of code before the first line that you want to include in the sample.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Line of code before the first line to include in the sample.
```

       **Default:** Beginning of file
   
   * - ``:end-before: <line of code>``

>      - The line of code after the last line that you want to include in the sample.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Line of code after the last line to include in the sample.
```

       **Default:** End of file

   * - ``:linenos:``

>      - Shows line numbers for the code sample.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Option that indicates whether to shows line numbers.
```

       **Default:** None
 
   * - ``:lineno-start:``

>      - The number at which to start line numbering. This option requires the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Number of the line at which to start showing line numbers. This option requires the
```

       ``:linenos:`` option.

       **Default:** 1

   * - ``:emphasize-lines: <line number>``

>      - Lines to highlight for the code sample. You can specify a range 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Lines to highlight. You can specify a range 
```

       of line numbers, individual line numbers, or both.

       **Default:** None
 
   * - ``:caption: <caption text>``

>      - The caption for the code sample.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Brief description.
```

       **Default:** None

   * - ``:dedent: <number of spaces>``

>      - The number of spaces to remove from the beginning of each line of code.
>        Use this option if the code you want to show is indented in the code file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Number of spaces to remove from the beginning of each line of code.
       Use this option if the code you want to show is indented in the code file.
```

       **Default:** None 

Example 1
~~~~~~~~~

> Suppose you want to include samples from the following Python file in a docs page:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Suppose you want to include samples from the following Python file in a documentation page:
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/python-sample.py
   :language: python

The following ``literalinclude`` directive starts with the first line of the file and
ends before the line that reads ``print("...but this line won't.")``: 

.. code-block::
 
   .. literalinclude:: /includes/python-sample.py
      :copyable: false
      :end-before: print("...but this line won't.")
      :caption: Sample Python code from another file
  
The previous ``literalinclude`` directive creates the following output:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/python-sample.py
   :copyable: false
   :end-before: print("...but this line won't.")
   :caption: Sample Python code from another file

Example 2
~~~~~~~~~

You can use comments to mark the points where the ``literalinclude`` directive

> starts and finishes pulling in code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
starts and finishes including code.
```

> By using comments instead of code, you can unambiguously specify the start and end of

Author: reworded

> the code sample, regardless of how many samples you're pulling in from the file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the code example, regardless of how many examples you're including from the file.
```

> the code sample, regardless of how many samples you're pulling in from the file.

Author: updated

> the code sample, regardless of how many samples you're pulling in from the file.

Reviewer 3: I wasn't able to locate this info other than the start-after and end-before list table descriptions. I still think it would be helpful to describe this in the description under the Literal Includes header, but happy to let you decide what you think would work best.

You also won't need to update the directive if the extracted code changes.

In the Python file in the previous example, the code inside ``sample_function()`` is
indented two spaces. The following ``literalinclude`` directive uses the ``:dedent:``

> option to remove these spaces:

Author: I'm not sure I understand your explanation; could you clarify?

> option to remove these spaces:

Reviewer 3: I don't remember if I had seen something in the description of the dedent option that needed clarification here, but looks fine to me now.
